The Great Depression. Why was it depressing? It's not like 30 million people lost their jobs, and were heading to California to find the “Land of Milk and Honey”, hoping that the fairytale was true. It all began the day the stock market crashed, more globally known as “Black Tuesday”. This crash wasn't a temporary fall that would find its way back up again, as it stayed at its nadir for the following 10 years. People described these long years as “The worst economic disaster in American history”, which isn’t dramatic. So what if this economic disaster came back—100 years later, 100 times stronger?

It commenced with a boom after World War I. “Overproduction in key industries, increased use of margin for purchasing stocks, and lack of global buyers around the world due to the war.”. Prices began to fall, billions of dollars were lost in only days. Many people started to withdraw their money from banks out of fear, resulting in countless banks failing and shutting down. Industrial production in the U.S. declined by 47%, affecting countries that would trade or borrow from the U.S. profoundly. Overproduction also became an issue because factories and farms were producing more goods than people could afford. 

During the great depression, food prices plummeted, impacting farmers. While unemployment and poverty soared making it exceedingly difficult for individuals and families to afford even basic necessities like food and housing, homelessness was at its peak. Bigger institutions like companies and banks would fail, people struggled to pay off their debt and savings would vanish.  

Although millions of people died due to the Great Depression’s effects, those who survived lived by a few methods. People brought back the ancient act of bartering. They would also find their own ways to get food without paying: planting crops, fishing, farming, and hunting. People would split costs by sharing food and living together. The government was also generous enough to offer jobs and give financial aid to the poor and unemployed. 

So how would we survive another Great Depression?

One potential trigger for a modern depression could be the rapid advancement and abuse of artificial intelligence (AI). As AI is evolving, it is likely that it will replace human jobs in the coming decades. This alone could leave millions of workers unemployed over a short period of time, leading to less spending and a potential market crash. Over time people would lose trust in companies that rely on AI, believing it could lead to harmful and unstable outcomes; causing demand to drop and resulting in companies going bankrupt. 

A down-to-earth theory is inequality of wealth share among the population, which is already very existent. Statistics show that 1.5% of individuals that earn at least $1 million USD annually, own and leverage 47.2% of the world's total wealth. Additionally, 42.7% of the population that individually make $10k to $100k annually, sharing only 12.6% of the world's total wealth. When wealth is held by a small group, spending slows down affecting overall demand. This scheme is similar to what happened back in 1929’s great depression. 

 A very existent and realistic theory is geopolitical conflict and war, though “great depressions” may exist within a few nations globally, a 3rd world war might implement a global great depression. For example, a trade war between large economies like the U.S. and China; many industries could lose an immense amount of money, this may cause the stock market to drop, not only affecting both economies, but also the supply chains of many other countries worldwide. Recall World War I and II, it caused food shortage and extreme inflation, rural impact and widespread destruction, rationalizing and resource scarcity, famine in countless countries, psychological impact, years or even decades of post-war recovery, and so much more economic damage as a result of the world wars.

In a modern day great depression, jobs quoted as “non-essential” would be lost first. These include actors and entertainers, as well as media and advertisement jobs. Other jobs that would be lost are manufacturing and warehouse, construction and real estate—as building and development slows down and eventually stops. Digital assets and banks could crash again, most likely in developing countries with weaker economies.  

During the great depression of 1929, food prices plummeted, impacting farmers. While unemployment and poverty soared making it exceedingly difficult for individuals and families to afford even basic necessities like food and housing, homelessness was at its peak. Bigger institutions like companies and banks would fail, people struggled to pay off their debt and savings would vanish. 

If a modern day great depression were on its way, gig workers would struggle the most due to their unsecure and unprotected job system. While workers with more steady jobs would struggle too, they are still better off in an economic crisis because their job has slightly more stability and financial protection.

Renters would struggle more than homeowners. As statistics show that roughly ⅓  of renters spend over 50% of their income on rent. Explicitly, 22% of US renters spend nearly their entire income on rent. In conclusion, in a great depression renters would struggle way more than homeowners, as renters spend plenty of their income on rent, have no legal claim to the property, and risk of eviction is always there, especially high during economic crises. 

Savings vs. paycheck to paycheck. Evidently, individuals and families living paycheck to paycheck would struggle far more than ones with savings in structure. As those living paycheck to paycheck are more likely to fall into debt and have a difficult time affording food and shelter. However, people with savings in place would be able to cover emergencies contingent on how much is saved, and they would most importantly be able to afford a stable lifestyle for longer.

Now the questions you were waiting for… 
How have times changed, and will it affect if we live or die?
How would we survive a great depression? 

In the great depression of 1929, people relied on radios, newspapers, and word of mouth. Many didn't know what was happening before it was too late. Conversely, in 2025, we would be more aware of what’s happening as news spreads like a wildfire, before even having time to comprehend it, the whole world would know. Because we have the internet, social media, 24-hour news stations—aforementioned, we’d definitely be more aware. In spite of that, we’d be profoundly prone to panic. 

Besides jobs that would be lost, in current times we have jobs that are more service, tech, and knowledge-based rather than industrial jobs. Though automation means that jobs can be quickly lost due to crisis. 

The U.S. government roughly 100 years ago, was hesitant at the start of the great depression, with limited programs that could help the poor and unemployed. Now, governments have tools such as unemployment benefits, stimulus checks, and central bank bailouts. They can act faster by being more prepared. 
